[FIX] Update HED appendix to comply with current HED version (#970)
bids-standard/bids-specification: src/99-appendices/03-hed.md

## HED annotations and vocabulary

A HED annotation consists of terms selected from a controlled
hierarchical vocabulary (the HED schema).
Individual terms are comma-separated and may be grouped using parentheses to indicate
association.
See [https://www.hedtags.org/display_hed.html](https://www.hedtags.org/display_hed.html)
to view the HED schema and the
[HED documentation](https://hed-specification.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html)
for additional resources.

Starting with HED version 8.0.0, HED allows users to annotate using individual
terms or partial paths in the HED vocabulary (`Red` or `Visual-presentation`)
rather than the full paths in the HED hierarchy (
`Property/Sensory-property/Sensory-attribute/Visual-attribute/Color/CSS-color/Red-color/Red`
or
`Property/Sensory-property/Sensory-presentation/Visual-presentation`).

Tools treat the short and long HED tag forms interchangeably,
converting when necessary based on the HED schema.
**Using the short form for tags is strongly recommended whenever possible**.

## Annotating events

BIDS events appear in tab-separated value (`_events.tsv`)
files in various places in the dataset hierarchy.

> BIDS event files must have `onset` and `duration` columns.
> Users may also include additional columns and define their
> meanings in associated JSON sidecar files (`_events.json`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`events.tsv` files MUST have `onset` and `duration` columns.
Dataset curators MAY also include additional columns and define their
meanings in associated JSON sidecar files (`events.json`).
```

> Example: An excerpt from an `*_events.tsv` containing three columns
> (`trial_type`, `response_time`, and `stim_file`) in addition to
> the required `onset` and `duration` columns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example: An excerpt from an `events.tsv` file containing three columns
(`trial_type`, `response_time`, and `stim_file`) in addition to
the required `onset` and `duration` columns.
```

```Text
onset  duration  trial_type  response_time stim_file
1.2    0.6       go          1.435         images/red_square.jpg
5.6    0.6       stop        1.739         images/blue_square.jpg
```

The `trial_type` column in the above example contains a limited number of distinct
values (`go` and `stop`).
This type of column is referred to as a *categorical* column,
and the column's meaning can be annotated by assigning HED tags to describe
each of these distinct values.

> The JSON sidecar provides a dictionary of annotations for these categorical values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The JSON sidecar provides a [JSON object](https://www.json.org/json-en.html) of annotations for these categorical values.
That is, the object is a dictionary mapping the categorical values to corresponding HED annotations.
```

In contrast, the `response_time` and `stim_file` columns could potentially contain
distinct values in every row.
These columns are referred to as *value* columns and are annotated by creating
a HED tag string to describe a general pattern for these values.
The HED annotation for a value column must include a `#` placeholder,

> which tools will replace by the actual column value when the annotations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which dedicated HED tools MUST replace by the actual column value when the annotations
```

are assembled for analysis.

> Example: An accompanying `_events.json` sidecar describing both categorical and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example: An accompanying `events.json` sidecar describing both categorical and
```

value columns of the previous example.

> The `Duration` column is also annotated as a value column.

Reviewer: I think I'd rather point out why the `onset` column is not annotated here.

Also: captialization --> 
```suggestion
The `duration` column is also annotated as a value column.
```

```JSON
{
  "Duration": {
    "LongName": "Image duration",
    "Description": "Duration of the image presentations",
    "Units": "s",
    "HED": "Duration/# s"
  },
  "trial_type": {
    "LongName": "Event category",
    "Description": "Indicator of type of action that is expected",
    "Levels": {
      "go": "A red square is displayed to indicate starting",
      "stop": "A blue square is displayed to indicate stopping"
    },
    "HED": {
          "go": "Sensory-event, Visual-presentation, ((Square, Blue),(Computer-screen, Center-of))",
          "stop": "Sensory-event, Visual-presentation, ((Square, Blue), (Computer-screen, Center-of))"
       }
   },
   "response_time": {
       "LongName": "Response time after stimulus",
       "Description": "Time from stimulus presentation until subject presses button",
       "Units": "ms",
       "HED": "(Delay/# ms, Agent-action, (Experiment-participant, (Press, Mouse-button))),"
   },
   "stim_file": {
       "LongName": "Stimulus filename",
       "Description": "Relative path of the stimulus image file",
       "HED": "Pathname/#"
   }
}
```

> Tools assemble an annotation for each event by concatenating the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dedicated HED tools MUST assemble an annotation for each event by concatenating the
```

annotations for each column.

Example: The fully assembled annotation for the first event in the above
`_events.tsv` file with onset 1.2 s is:

```Text
Duration/0.6 s, Sensory-event, Visual-presentation,
((Square, Blue), (Computer-screen, Center-of)),
(Delay/1.435 ms, Agent-action,
(Experiment-participant, (Press, Mouse-button))),
Pathname/images/red_square.jpg

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

## Annotation using the `HED` column

Another tagging strategy is to annotate individual events directly by

> including a `HED` column in the `_events.tsv`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
including a `HED` column in the `events.tsv` file.
```

This approach is necessary when each event has annotations that are unique
and do not fit into a standard set of patterns.

> Some acquisition/presentation software systems directly
> write annotations during the experiment, and these might also be placed in the
> `HED` column of the `_events.tsv` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some acquisition or presentation software systems directly
write annotations during the experiment, and these MAY also be placed in the
`HED` column of the `events.tsv` file.
```

Tools that assemble the full annotation for events treat do not distinguish
between HED annotations extracted from `_events.json` sidecars and those
appearing in the `HED` column of `_events.tsv` files.
The HED strings from all sources are concatenated to form the final
event annotations.

Annotations placed in sidecars are preferred to those placed
directly in the `HED` column, because they are simpler, more compact,
more easily edited, and less prone to inconsistent annotation.

## HED and the BIDS inheritance principle

Most studies have event files whose columns contain categorical and
numerical values that are similar across the recordings in the study.

> Ideally, these columns should be annotated in a single `_events.json` sidecar
> placed at the top level in the dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is RECOMMENDED to annotate these columns in a single
`events.json` sidecar, placed at the top level in the dataset.
```

standard pattern, then the annotations for that column MUST be placed in
sidecars at lower levels in the hierarchy.
According to the BIDS [inheritance principle](../02-common-principles.md#the-inheritance-principle),
once a column key in a sidecar (the column name found in the `_events.tsv` files)
is set, it cannot be unset by a sidecar appearing at a lower level in the dataset hierarchy.

## HED schema versions

The HED vocabulary is specified by a HED schema,
which delineates the allowed HED path strings.
The version of HED used in tagging a dataset should be provided in the `HEDVersion`
field of the `dataset_description.json` file located in the dataset root directory.

Example: The following `dataset_description.json` file specifies that
[`HED8.0.0.xml`](https://github.com/hed-standard/hed-specification/tree/master/hedxml/HED8.0.0.xml)
file from the `hedxml` directory of the
[`hed-specification`](https://github.com/hed-standard/hed-specification)
repository on GitHub should be used to validate the study event annotations.

```JSON
{
  "Name": "A great experiment",
  "BIDSVersion": "1.6.0",
  "HEDVersion": "8.0.0"
}
```

> If you omit the `HEDVersion` from the dataset description file
> or are running the BIDS validator behind a firewall and cannot access GitHub,
> the HED validation will fall back to the latest version of the HED schema,
> which it stores internally.

Reviewer: I removed the technical detail on the firewall ... if you absolutely need it, then I would suggest putting it as a minor fact or in parentheses, after the important things have been stated.

```suggestion
If you omit the `HEDVersion` field from the dataset description file,
any present HED information will be validated using the latest version of the HED schema,
which is bound to result in problems.
Hence, it is strongly RECOMMENDED to supply the `HEDVersion` field when using HED
in a BIDS dataset.
```

This type of column is referred to as a *categorical* column,
and the column's meaning can be annotated by assigning HED tags to describe
each of these distinct values.
The JSON sidecar provides a dictionary of annotations for these categorical values.

In contrast, the `response_time` and `stim_file` columns could potentially contain
distinct values in every row.
These columns are referred to as *value* columns and are annotated by creating
a HED tag string to describe a general pattern for these values.
The HED annotation for a value column must include a `#` placeholder,
which tools will replace by the actual column value when the annotations
are assembled for analysis.

Example: An accompanying `_events.json` sidecar describing both categorical and
value columns of the previous example.
The `Duration` column is also annotated as a value column.

```JSON
{
   "trial_type": {
       "LongName": "Event category",
       "Description": "Indicator of type of action that is expected",
       "Levels": {
          "go": "A red square is displayed to indicate starting",
          "stop": "A blue square is displayed to indicate stopping",
       },
       "HED": {

>           "go": "Event/Category/Experimental stimulus, Event/Label/RedSquare,

Author: The `eeg_hed_small` in the `bids_examples` repository on GitHub uses the preferred short form.

There are no examples currently in `bids_examples` that use long form, and I hesitate to put one there.

Instead, I just updated the PR with  a link to the `hed-examples` repository on `hed-standard` on GitHub.

In this repository we are developing various versions of repositories for testing, and I will put an `eeg_ds003654s_longform` and an `eeg_ds003654s_longform_defsexp` version on the repository. (The later refers to the option of expanding the definitions.)  

I will also add a `README` to the `datasets` directory there.

>           "go": "Event/Category/Experimental stimulus, Event/Label/RedSquare,

Author: On thinking about it.... we should probably also put a hybrid example to `bids-examples` so that unit tests verify that these forms are handled by the `bids-validator`.

>           "go": "Event/Category/Experimental stimulus, Event/Label/RedSquare,

Reviewer 2: Great, this resolves these questions!
